#5. Mathematical formulation of the principle

A profound change has taken place during the present century in the opinions physicists have held on the mathematical foundations of their subject. Previously they supposed that the principles of Newtonian mechanics would provide the basis for the description of the whole of physical phenomena and that all the theoretical physicist had to do was suitably to develop and apply these principles. With the recognition that there is no logical reason why Newtonian and other classical principles should be valid outside the domains in which they have been experimentally verified has come the realization that departures from these principles are indeed necessary. Such departures find their expression through the introduction of new mathematical formalisms, new schemes of axioms and rules of manipulation, into the methods of theoretical physics.

Quantum mechanics provides a good example of the new ideas. It requires the states of a dynamical system and the dynamical variables to be interconnected in quite strange ways that are unintelligible from the classical standpoint. The states and dynamical variables have to be represented by mathematical quantities of different natures from those ordinarily used in physics. The new scheme becomes a precise physical theory when all the axioms and rules of manipulation governing the mathematical quantities are specified and when in addition certain laws are laid down connecting physical facts with the mathematical formalism, so that from any given physical conditions equations between the mathematical quantities may be inferred and vice versa. In an application of the theory one would be given certain physical information, which one would proceed to express by equations between the mathematical quantities. One would then deduce new equations with the help of the axioms and rules of manipulation and would conclude by interpreting these new equations as physical conditions. The justification for the whole scheme depends, apart from internal consistency, on the agreement of the final results with experiment.

We shall begin to set up the scheme by dealing with the mathematical relations between the states of a dynamical system at one instant of time, which relations will come from the mathematical formulation of the principle of superposition. The superposition process is a kind of additive process and implies that states can in some way be added to give new states. The states must therefore be connected with mathematical quantities of a kind which can be added together to give other quantities of the same kind. The most obvious of such quantities are vectors. Ordinary vectors, existing in a space of a finite number of dimensions, are not sufficiently general for most of the dynamical systems in quantum mechanics. We have to make a generalization to vectors in a space of an infinite number of dimensions, and the mathematical treatment becomes complicated by questions of convergence. For the present, however, we shall deal merely with some general properties of the vectors, properties which can be deduced on the basis of a simple scheme of axioms, and questions of convergence and related topics will not be gone into until the need arises.

It is desirable to have a special name for describing the vectors which are connected with the states of a system in quantum mechanics, whether they are in a space of a finite or an infinite number of dimensions. We shall call them ket vectors, or simply kets, and denote a general one of them by a special symbol $\ket{}$. If we want to specify a particular one of them by a label, A say, we insert it in the middle, thus $\ket{A}$. The suitability of this notation will become clear as the scheme is developed.

Ket vectors may be multiplied by complex numbers and may be added together to give other ket vectors, from two ket vectors $\ket{A}$ and $\ket{B}$ we can form

\begin{equation}c_1| A \rangle + c_2 | B \rangle = | R \rangle,\end{equation}

say, where $c_1$ and $c_2$ are any two complex numbers. We may also perform more general linear processes with them, such as adding an infinite sequence of them, and if we have a ket vector $\ket{x}$, depending on and labelled by a parameter x which can take on all values in a certain range, we may integrate it with respect to x, to get another ket vector
$$\int \ket{x} \operatorname{d}x = \ket{Q}$$
say. A ket vector which is expressible linearly in terms of certain others is said to be dependent on them. A set of ket vectors are called independent if no one of them is expressible linearly in terms of the others.

We now assume that each state of a dynamical system at a particular time corresponds to a ket vector, the correspondence being such that if a state results from the superposition of certain other states, its corresponding ket vector is expressible linearly in terms of the corresponding ket vectors of the other states, and conversely. Thus the state $\ket{R}$ results from a superposition of the states $\ket{A}$ and $\ket{B}$ when the corresponding ket vectors are connected by (1).

The above assumption leads to certain properties of the superposition process, properties which are in fact necessary for the word 'superposition' to be appropriate. When two or more states are superposed, the order in which they occur in the superposition process is unimportant, so the superposition process is symmetrical between the states that are superposed. Again, we see from equation (1) that (excluding the case when the coefficient $c_1$ or $c_2$ is zero) if the state $\ket{R}$ can be formed by superposition of the states $\ket{A}$ and $\ket{B}$, then the state $\ket{A}$ can be formed by superposition of $\ket{B}$ and $\ket{R}$, and $\ket{B}$ can be formed by superposition of $\ket{A}$ and $\ket{R}$. The superposition relationship is symmetrical between all three states $\ket{A}$, $\ket{B}$, and $\ket{R}$.

A state which results from the superposition of certain other states will be said to be dependent on those states. More generally, a state will be said to be dependent on any set of states, finite or infinite in number, if its corresponding ket vector is dependent on the corresponding ket vectors of the set of states. A set of states will be called independent if no one of them is dependent on the others.

To proceed with the mathematical formulation of the superposition principle we must introduce a further assumption, namely the assumption that by superposing a state with itself we cannot form any new state, but only the original state over again. If the original state corresponds to the ket vector $\ket{A}$, when it is superposed with itself the resulting state will correspond to

\begin{equation} \nonumber c_1\ket{A} + c_2\ket{A} = (c_1 + c_2) \ket{A},\end{equation}
where c1 and c2 are numbers. Now we may have $c_1 + c_2 = 0$, in which case the result of the superposition process would be nothing at all, the two components having cancelled each other by an interference effect. Our new assumption requires that, apart from this special case, the resulting state must be the same as the original one, so that $(c_1 + c_2) \ket{A}$ must correspond to the same state that $\ket{A}$ does. Now $c_1 + c_2$ is an arbitrary complex number and hence we can conclude that if the ket vector corresponding to a state is multiplied by any complex number, not zero, the resulting ket vector will correspond to the same state. Thus a state is specified by the direction of a ket vector and any length one may assign to the ket vector is irrelevant. All the states of the dynamical system are in one - one correspondence with all the possible directions for a ket vector, no distinction being made between the directions of the ket vectors $\ket{A}$ and $-\ket{A}$.

The assumption just made shows up very clearly the fundamental difference between the superposition of the quantum theory and any kind of classical superposition. In the case of a classical system for which a superposition principle holds, for instance a vibrating membrane, when one superposes a state with itself the result is a different state, with a different magnitude of the oscillations. There is no physical characteristic of a quantum state corresponding to the magnitude of the classical oscillations, as distinct from their quality, described by the ratios of the amplitudes at different points of the membrane. Again, while there exists a classical state with zero amplitude of oscillation everywhere, namely the state of rest, there does not exist any corresponding state for a quantum system, the zero ket vector corresponding to no state at all.

Given two states corresponding to the ket vectors $\ket{A}$ and $\ket{B}$, the general state formed by superposing them corresponds to a ket vector $\ket{R}$ which is determined by two complex numbers, namely the coefficients $c_1$ and $c_2$ of equation (1). If these two coefficients are multiplied by the same factor (itself a complex number), the ket vector $\ket{R}$ will get multiplied by this factor and the corresponding state will be unaltered. Thus only the ratio of the two coefficients is effective in determining the state R. Hence this state is determined by one complex number, or by two real parameters. Thus from two given states, a twofold infinity of states may be obtained by superposition.

This result is confirmed by the examples discussed in ยง 2 and ยง 3. In the example of ยง 2 there are just two independent states of polarization for a photon, which may be taken to be the states of plane polarization parallel and perpendicular to some fixed direction, and from the superposition of these two a twofold infinity of states of polarization can be obtained, namely all the states of elliptic polarization, the general one of which requires two parameters to describe it. Again, in the example of ยง 3, from the superposition of two given translational states for a photon a twofold infinity of translational states may be obtained, the general one of which is described by two parameters, which may be taken to be the ratio of the amplitudes of the two wave functions that are added together and their phase relationship. This confirmation shows the need for allowing complex coefficients in equation (1). If these coefficients were restricted to be real, then, since only their ratio is of importance for determining the direction of the resultant ket vector $\ket{R}$ when $\ket{A}$ and $\ket{B}$ are given, there would be only a simple infinity of states obtainable from the superposition.
