<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-45.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-47.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

[3.10  Summary](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_3.10)
-------------------------------------------------

Lagrange's equations are a system of *n* second-order ordinary
differential equations in the time, the generalized coordinates, the
generalized velocities, and the generalized accelerations. Trajectories
are determined by the coordinates and the velocities at a moment.

Hamilton's equations specify the dynamics as a system of first-order
ordinary differential equations in the time, the generalized
coordinates, and the conjugate momenta. Phase-space trajectories are
determined by an initial point in phase space at a moment.

The Hamiltonian formulation and the Lagrangian formulation are
equivalent in that equivalent initial conditions produce the same
configuration path.

If there is a symmetry of the problem that is naturally expressed as a
cyclic coordinate, then the conjugate momentum is conserved. In the
Hamiltonian formulation, such a symmetry naturally results in the
reduction of the dimension of the phase space of the difficult part of
the problem. If there are enough symmetries, then the problem of
determining the time evolution may be reduced to evaluation of definite
integrals (reduced to quadratures).

Systems without enough symmetries to be reducible to quadratures may be
effectively studied with the surface of section technique. This is
particularly advantageous in systems for which the reduced problem has
two degrees of freedom or has one degree of freedom with explicit
periodic time dependence.

Surfaces of section reveal tremendous structure in the phase space.
There are chaotic zones and islands of regular behavior. There are
interesting transitions as parameters are varied between mostly regular
motion and mostly chaotic motion.

Chaotic trajectories exhibit sensitive dependence on initial conditions,
separating exponentially from nearby trajectories. Regular trajectories
do not show such sensitivity. Curiously, chaotic trajectories are
distinguished both by the dimension of the space they explore and by
their exponential divergence.

The time evolution of a 2*n*-dimensional region in phase space preserves
the volume. Hamiltonian flow is \`\`incompressible'' flow of the
\`\`phase fluid.''

Surfaces of section for two-degree-of-freedom systems and for
periodically driven one-degree-of-freedom systems are area preserving.
Abstract area-preserving maps of a phase plane onto itself show the same
division of the phase space into chaotic and regular regions as surfaces
of section generated by dynamical systems. They also show transitions to
large-scale chaos.

<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-45.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-47.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

activate javascript

