<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-54.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-56.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

[4.7  Summary](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_4.7)
-----------------------------------------------

Surfaces of section of a typical Hamiltonian system exhibit a menagerie
of features including fixed points, invariant curves, resonance islands,
and chaotic zones. Integrable systems have much simpler surfaces of
section. By adding small effects to integrable systems we get insight
into how this complicated behavior emerges.

Surfaces of section for integrable systems display only certain
characteristic orbit types. There are fixed points, which correspond to
equilibria or periodic orbits. A fixed point may be stable or unstable,
depending on the stability of the corresponding equilibrium or orbit.
There are sets of points on the section that are asymptotic forward and
backward in time to the unstable fixed point. And there are sets of
trajectories that fall on invariant curves. If the rotation number of
the invariant curve is irrational, each of these trajectories densely
covers the invariant curve; if the rotation number is rational, then
each trajectory visits only a finite number of points on the invariant
curve.

Linear stability analysis addresses the nature of the motion near the
fixed points on the section. These points correspond to either
equilibrium points or periodic orbits. There are characteristic
frequencies of the motion, each with an associated characteristic
direction. For Hamiltonian systems only certain patterns of
characteristic frequencies are possible. On two-dimensional
area-preserving surfaces of section, as generated by Hamiltonian
systems, fixed points are linearly stable (elliptic fixed points) or
linearly unstable (hyperbolic fixed points).

With the addition of small effects, the surface of section changes in
certain typical ways. One characteristic change occurs near the unstable
fixed points. The stable and unstable manifolds, those curves consisting
of the sets of points that are asymptotic to the unstable fixed points
forward and backward in time, no longer join smoothly, but instead
cross. A first crossing implies that there are an infinite number of
other crossings, and the stable and unstable manifolds develop an
extremely complicated tangle.

The Poincaré-Birkhoff construction shows how the infinite number of
periodic orbits on an invariant curve with rational rotation number that
is characteristic of an integrable system degenerates into a finite
number of alternating stable and unstable fixed points when the system
becomes nonintegrable. This phenomenon is recursive, so we find that it
develops an infinite hierarchy of structure: The region around every
stable fixed point is itself filled with commensurabilities with
alternating stable and unstable fixed points.

Some invariant curves survive the addition of small effects to an
integrable system. The Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser theorem proves that some
invariant curves persist upon perturbation. We can find invariant curves
of particular rotation numbers by comparing the pattern of points
generated for a candidate initial point on the invariant curve to the
expected pattern of points for the invariant curve being sought. As the
additional effect is made stronger, the invariant curves that survive
longest are those with the most irrational rotation number. At the point
of breakup, the probability of visitation of various points on the
invariant curve develops a self-similar appearance. For larger
perturbations, the invariant curve disappears, leaving an invariant set
with an infinite number of holes.

<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-54.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-56.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

activate javascript

